PENSIONS

There are two aspects of the pension cost problem upon which manage-
ment can have a significant impact: (1) maintaining rational control
over pension plan promises to employees and (2) increasing investment
returns on pension plan assets.

The Irreversible Nature of Pension Promises

To control promises rationally, it is necessary to understand the
basic arithmetic and practical rules governing pension plans.

The first thing to recognize, with every pension benefit decision, is
that you almost certainly are playing for keeps and won't be able to
reverse your decision subsequently if it produces subnormal profitability.

As a practical matter, it is next to impossible to decrease pension
benefits in a large profitable company ~ or even a large marginal one.
The plan may embody language unequivocally declaring the company's right
to terminate at any time and providing that contributions shall be
solely at the option of the company. But the law has eroded much of
the significance such "out" clauses were presumed to have, and operat-
ing practicalities render any residual rights to terminate moot.

So, rule number one regarding pension costs has to be to know what you
are getting into before signing up. Look before you leap. There prob-
ably is more managerial ignorance on pension costs than any other cost
item of remotely similar magnitude. And, as will becone so expensively
clear to citizens in future decades, there has been even greater
electorate ignorance of governmental pension costs. Actuarial thinking
simply is not intuitive to most minds. The lexicon is arcane, the
numbers seem unreal, and making promises never quite triggers the
visceral response evoked by writing a check.

In no other managerial area can such huge aggregate Liabilities - which
will be reflected in progressively increasing annual costs and cash
requirements - be created so quickly and with so little immediate fi-
nancial pain. Like pressroom Labor practices, small errors will com-
pound. Care and caution are in order.

Deceptive Arithmetic of "Promise Now - Pay Later"

If you promise to pay me $500 per month for life, you have just ex-
pended - actuarially but, nevertheless, in a totally tangible sense -
about $65,000. If you are financially good for such a lifetime promise,
you would be better off (if I have an average expectancy regarding longev-
ity for one my age) handing me a check for $50,000. But it wouldn't

feel the same.

tn, een erent haere

-2-

And, if you promise to pay me 1,000 hamburgers a month for life which,
superficially, may sound equivalent to the previous proposition
(assuming a present hamburger price of 50¢), you have created an obli-
gation which, in an inflationary world, becomes most difficult to

evaluate. This creates a risk we talk of Later as an "earthquake risk".

One thing is certain. You won't find an insurance company willing to
take the 1,000-hamburgers-a-month obligation off your hands for
$65,000 - or even $130,000. While hamburgers equate to 50¢ now, the
promise to pay hamburgers in the future does not equate to the promise
to pay fifty-cent pieces in the future.

So, before plans are introduced or amended, the financial consequences
(particularly in a world of significant inflation which I believe to
be close to a certainty)* should be clearly understood by you. Con-
sulting actuaries are very good at making calculations. They are
frequently terrible at making the assumptions upon which the calcula-
tions are based. In fact, they well may be peculiarly ill-equipped

to make the most important assumptions if the world is one of economic
discontinuities. They are trained to be conventional. Their self-
interest in obtaining and retaining business would be ill-served if
they were to become more than mildly unconventional. And being con-
ventional on the crucial assumptions basically means accepting histor-
ical experience adjusted by a moderate nudge from current events.

This works fine in forecasting such factors as mortality and morbidity,
works reasonably well on items such as employee turnover, and can be

a disaster in estimating: the two most important elements of the
pension cost equation, which are fund earnings and salary escalation.

Illustrated Elemental Actuarial Principles

To illustrate a few actuarial principles worth understanding, but
without employing the technical jargon and the asterisks, let's use
the example of your household. Assume that you, personally, make
irrevocable promises to pay pensions of $300 per month for Life after
they reach 65 to, say, four household employees. To make it easy,
let's say that they each are 55 years of age at present. If you make
that promise today, you have reduced your net worth today by about

* , My views regarding inflationary possibilities are more extreme
than those of most respected observers. It is difficult to substan-
tiate a dogmatic view, since conclusions rest more upon social and
political judgments than upon economic training and analysis. You
should recognize the subjective nature of the reasoning leading to
my pessimistic conclusions regarding inflation over the longer

term - and not be reluctant to correct accordingly.


$70,000. (For simplicity's sake, I am ignoring some variables such
as sex of employees - women live longer and therefore cost more -
death before 65, ete. In calculating such factors the actuaries
shine.)

Why are you immediately $70,000 poorer? Well, if you set aside a
$70,000 fund now and invest it at 7% interest - and let all such int-
erest remain in the fund to be compounded - the principal value of
the fund will grow to about $140,000 in ten years when your employees
reach 65. And to buy them a lifetime annuity of $3,600 per year will
then cost about $35,000 each, utilizing the entire accumulated cap-
ital of the fund. So if you make the promise and it is binding -
legally or morally - figure you have spent today $70,000, even though
you don't have to pay out a dime of cash for ten years.

Now take it one step further and assume that your employees each are
earning $600 per month but, instead of promising them $300 per month
upon retirement, you promise them 50% of their salary at the time
they retire. If their increases run 7.2% per year - and they prob-
ably will in the world I foresee - they will be earning $1,200 per
month by the time they reach 65. And it will now cost you $70,000
each to purchase annuities for them to fulfill your promise. The
actual cost, today, of modifying your promise from 50% of present pay
to 50% of terminal pay was to exactly double the fund that needed to
be set aside now from $70,000 to $140,000.

Many pension plans use final average pay (usually the average of the
last five years, or the highest consecutive five years in the last

ten years employed) and some use career average pay. I am not arguing
here which should be used, but am illustrating the dramatic difference
in costs that can occur because of rather minor-appearing changes in
wording.

Pension costs in a labor intensive business clearly can be of major
size and an important variable in the cost picture, particularly in

a world characterized by high rates of inflation. I emphasize the
latter factor to the point of redundancy because most managements I
know - and virtually all elected officials in the case of governmental
plans - simply never fully grasp the magnitude of liabilities they

are incurring by relatively painless current promises. In many cases
in the public area the bill in large part will be handed to the next
generation, to be paid by increased taxes or by accelerated use of

the printing press. But in a corporation the bill will have to be
paid out of current and future revenues - with interest - and frequently
with what is, in effect, a cost-of-living escalator.


~t

The "Earthquake Risk"

In Germany, in the great inflation of the early 1920s, the entire
Daimler Benz (Mercedes) Automobile Company was selling in the mar-

ket for the price of 300 motor cars. Almost all past investments

were nearly worthless, and current salary levels were astronomical

in relation to past history. Under such conditions, or conditions

far short of such an extreme, the burden of any pension benefits owed
by a business, which are based on current salary levels though related
to much earlier service in employment, must be backed almost exclus-
ively by the current value (earning power) of the business. Advance
funding simply evaporates.

For example, assume that salaries (and the cost of living) are moving
upward at 25% per year and the pension fund is earning 10% per

year - a set of assumptions not ridiculously different from what
exists in England at the moment. Under such conditions, funds put
aside for retirement immediately begin to shrink in relation to prom-
ised benefits. Every month fewer hamburgers can be purchased from
the funds contributed to the pension plan - even after accumulating
dividends and interest on the funds.

Almost no one chooses to think about this sort of "earthquake risk"

in dealing with pension plans, any more than people choose to spend
much time thinking about nuclear war. It may be my earlier-mentioned
bias, or my mathematical bent, but I believe some "unthinkable"
inflation-related calculations should be made - and even considered -
before any company assumes open-ended pension obligations guaranteeing
a large number of persons absolute protection against inflation by
gearing benefits without limit to final pay or escalating benefits

to persons already retired, based on changes in the cost of Living.

Thus, the really devastating possibility regarding private pension
plans is sustained double-digit inflation. When salaries move ahead
at a substantially higher rate than investment returns and benefits
are tied to final salaries (or, even more expensively, cost-of-
Living increases after retirement as in recent rubber and aluminum
contracts), it is virtually impossible to pre-fund obligations. Like
it or not, you become much like the Social Security Fund, absent the
power to tax. Should that occur, future purchasers of the products
of the company must be willing to do so at prices that reflect not
only the wages of current workers, but the promises to past workers.
Some businesses will have economic characteristics allowing them to
pass along these costs, but others will have major troubles. On
balance, I believe we are in relatively favorable businesses under


such circumstances. I do not believe this problem can be solved by
the investment process. I mention it for completeness, not because
I have answers - and to urge caution in making pension benefit prom-
ises subject to dramatic escalation through substantial attrition in
the purchasing power of money.

Now Letts look at funding and investment behavior appropriate to an
economic world at Least reasonably similar to the past, recognizing
that such a world is far from a certainty.

The Investment Management Problem Inherent in All Pension Plans

Once having committed to provide pensions, how do we pay? The law
and prudent business practice mandate that we start putting aside
funds on a fairly orderly and consistent basis from which we can ful-
fill our promises. In this manner we pay the employee currently
while he is being productive for the company, and we simultaneously
set up a savings account (collectively, not individually) which will
accumulate at interest so as to purchase an annuity (not actually
"purchased" in most plans, of course, just assured by the pension
fund) for him at retirement which will discharge our promise to pay
him throughout his non-productive years. Thus, our current cost and
current cash requirements (if our estimates are accurate as to what we
will earn on the savings account as well as other estimates regarding
turnover, salary escalation, longevity, etc.) will reflect his total
lifetime employment costs to us spread rather evenly over his produc-
tive years.

(This advance funding treatment, matching full current costs against
current production, contrasts with the Social Security Plan's pro-
gram which essentially taxes current producers to pay current non-
producers. This simply means moving a portion of current national
output of goods and services over from those who produced it to those
who are non-producing, and to whom promises have been made. If such
a system had been in effect for a very long time, the demographic
profile remained fairly constant, the promises remained fairly constant,
and there was no inflation, the net effect from such a pay-as-you-go
approach would not substantially differ from an advance funding basis.
However, these conditions do not exist which may make for various
problems - including some that exacerbate inflation and thus have
negative fall-out for the economics of private plans.)

Because a business corporation, unlike the Federal government, has to
create a "savings account" - an investment accumulating and investment
